[docs] batch inference docs (#34567)
ray-project/ray: doc/source/data/batch_inference.rst

            .. annotations::
                <1> Use the constructor (``__init__``) to initialize your model.

                <2> The ``__call__`` method runs inference on a batch of data.

    .. group-tab:: TensorFlow

        .. callout::

            .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/tf_quick_start.py
                :language: python
                :start-after: __tf_quickstart_model_start__
                :end-before: __tf_quickstart_model_end__

            .. annotations::
                <1> Use the constructor (``__init__``) to initialize your model.

                <2> The ``__call__`` method runs inference on a batch of data.

3. Getting predictions with Ray Data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once you have your Ray Datastream ``ds`` and your predictor class, you can use
:meth:`ds.map_batches() <ray.data.Dataset.map_batches>` to get predictions.
``map_batches`` takes your predictor class as an argument and allows you to specify
``compute`` resources by defining the :class:`ActorPoolStrategy <ray.data.ActorPoolStrategy>`.
In the example below, we use two CPUs to run inference in parallel and then print the results.

> We cover resource allocation in more detail in :ref:`the configuration section of this guide<batch_inference_config>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We cover resource allocation in more detail in :ref:`the configuration section of this guide <batch_inference_config>`.
```

Reviewer: Not sure if the space will fix the broken link, but just made a guess.

  refer to the right format name to run batch inference on your data.
- Output batch formats: This is the format your UDFs return.

In many standard cases, the input batch format is the same as the output batch format,
but it's good to be aware of the differences.

.. margin::
    We refer to batch formats by name in Ray Data (using strings).
    For instance, the batch format used to represent Pandas dataframes is called ``"pandas"``.
    We often use batch format names and the libraries they represent interchangeably.

Let's focus on the three available input batch formats first,
namely Pandas, NumPy, and Arrow, and how they're used in Ray Data:

.. tabbed:: Pandas

  The ``"pandas"`` batch format presents batches in
  `pandas.DataFrame <https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.html>`__
  format. If converting a simple dataset to Pandas DataFrame batches, a single-column
  dataframe with the column ``"__value__"`` will be created.

  .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/batch_formats.py
    :language: python
    :start-after: __simple_pandas_start__
    :end-before: __simple_pandas_end__

> .. tabbed:: NumPy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. tabbed:: NumPy (default)
```

And move to first tab?

  The ``"numpy"`` batch format presents batches in
  `numpy.ndarray <https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.ndarray.html>`__
  format as follows:

  * **Tabular datasets**: Each batch will be a dictionary of NumPy
    ndarrays (``Dict[str, np.ndarray]``), with each key-value pair representing a column
    in the table.

>   * **Tensor datasets** (single-column): Each batch will be a single

Reviewer 2: This will be disallowed in strict mode.

For instance, when loading a NumPy array with :meth:`ray.data.from_numpy() <ray.data.from_numpy>`,
the batch format will be ``"numpy"``, but it's not always that easy.

In any case, Ray Data has a ``"default"`` batch format that is computed per data type
as follows:

.. tabbed:: Tabular data

    Each batch will be a
    `pandas.DataFrame <https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.html>`__.
    This may incur a conversion cost if the underlying Datastream block is not
    zero-copy convertible from an Arrow table.

    .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/transforming_datastreams.py
        :language: python
        :start-after: __writing_default_udfs_tabular_begin__
        :end-before: __writing_default_udfs_tabular_end__

.. tabbed:: Tensor data (single-column)

    Each batch will be a single
    `numpy.ndarray <https://numpy.org/doc/stable/reference/generated/numpy.ndarray.html>`__
    containing the single tensor column for this batch.

    .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/transforming_datastreams.py
        :language: python
        :start-after: __writing_default_udfs_tensor_begin__
        :end-before: __writing_default_udfs_tensor_end__

> .. tabbed:: Simple data

Reviewer 2: This will be disallowed in strict mode.

.. _batch_inference_home:

Running Batch Inference with Ray
================================

.. seealso::

    In this tutorial you'll learn what batch inference is, why you might want to use
    Ray for it, and how to use Ray effectively for this task.

>     If you are familiar with the basics of inference tasks, you can jump straight into

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If you are familiar with the basics of inference tasks, jump straight to
```

Reviewer: Suggest not starting off the doc with a `See also` callout and rely on the TOC on the RHS. I noticed that the RHS TOC is collapsed by default on this page, where it's expanded by default on other pages.

Author: no, it's hidden when there's stuff on the right, like the margin I had there (should be gone now)

>     the code of our :ref:`quickstart section <batch_inference_quickstart>` or our

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    code in the :ref:`quickstart section <batch_inference_quickstart>` or the
```

    :ref:`advanced guide<batch_inference_advanced_pytorch_example>`.

Batch inference refers to generating model predictions on a set of input data.
The model can range from a simple a Python function to a complex neural network.
In batch inference, also known as offline inference, your model is run on a large
batch of data on demand.

> .. margin::

Reviewer: Suggest moving this to the main column.

Author: done

    This is in contrast to online inference, where the model is run immediately on a
    data point when it becomes available.

Here's a simple schematic of batch inference, "mapping" batches to predictions
via model inference:

> .. figure:: images/batch_inference.png

Reviewer: Not sure if this graphic is needed, given the next graphic.

  Evaluating a batch of input data with a model to get predictions.

Batch inference is a foundational workload for many AI companies, especially since
more and more pre-trained models become available.
And while batch inference looks simple at the surface, it can be challenging to do right in production.
For instance, your data batches can be excessively large, too slow to process sequentially,
or might need custom preprocessing before being fed into your models.

> To run inference workloads effectively at scale, you need to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To run inference workloads effectively at scale, you need to:
```

- manage your compute infrastructure and cloud clusters

> - parallelize data processing and utilize all your cluster resources (CPUs & GPUs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- parallelize data processing and utilize all your cluster resources (CPUs and GPUs)
```

> - efficiently transferring data between cloud storage, CPUs for preprocessing, and GPUs for model inference.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- efficiently transfer data between cloud storage, CPUs for preprocessing, and GPUs for model inference
```

> Here's a more realistic view of batch inference for modern AI applications:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's a realistic view of batch inference for modern AI applications:
```

.. figure:: images/batch_inference_overview.png

  Evaluating a batch of input data with a model to get predictions.

Why use Ray for batch inference?
---------------------------------

> There are many good reasons to use Ray for batch inference today, even if your current

Reviewer: The formatting and language in this section seems like marketing.
```suggestion
There are reasons to use Ray for batch inference, even if your current
```

use case does not require scaling yet:

1. **Faster and Cheaper for modern Deep Learning Applications**: Ray is built for
    complex workloads and supports loading and preprocessing data with CPUs and model inference on GPUs.

> 2. **Cloud, framework, and data format agnostic**. Ray Data works on any cloud provider,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Cloud, framework, and data format agnostic**: Ray Data works on any cloud provider,
```

>     any ML framework (like PyTorch and Tensorflow) and does not require a particular file format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    or any ML framework (like PyTorch and Tensorflow), and does not require a particular file format.
```

3. **Out of the box scaling**: The same code that works on one machine also runs on a
    large cluster without any changes.

> 4. **Python first** You can express your inference job directly in Python instead of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **Python first**: You can express your inference job directly in Python instead of
```

    YAML files or other formats.

.. _batch_inference_quickstart:

Quick Start
-----------

> To get started with batch inference with Ray, the first thing you need to do is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To get started,
```

> install Ray together with its data processing library Ray Data:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
install Ray with the data processing library, Ray Data:
```

.. code-block:: bash

    pip install ray[data]

> Running batch inference is conceptually easy and requires just three simple steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Running batch inference is conceptually easy and requires the three following steps:
```

> that we'll walk through in this guide:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 1. Load your data into a Ray ``Datastream`` and optionally apply any preprocessing you need.

Reviewer 3: Consider getting rid of the `Datastream` terminology here and instead do `Load your data and optionally apply any preprocessing you need.`, where `Load you data` links to https://anyscale-ray--34567.com.readthedocs.build/en/34567/data/api/input_output.html#input-output -- this will be far more useful for people to understand :)

Author: @pcmoritz well, I agree with you, but then why did we go for this naming convention in the first place? we literally just changed it. I don't see the benefit, yet I'm happy to disagree and commit. But changing it and then _not_ committing fully is the worst of all scenarios.

2. Define your model for inference.
3. Run inference on your data by using the ``.map_batches()`` method from Ray Data.

The last step also defines how your batch processing job gets distributed across your (local) cluster.
We start with very simple use cases here and build up to more complex ones in other guides and tutorials.

.. note::

    All advanced use cases ultimately boil down to extensions of the above three steps,
    like loading and storing data from cloud storage, using complex preprocessing functions,
    demanding model setups, additional postprocessing, or other customizations.
    We'll cover these advanced use cases in the next sections.

> 1. Loading and Preprocessing Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Loading and preprocessing data
```

Reviewer: You were using sentence case earlier, so I'm suggesting consistency.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> For this quick-start guide we'll simply use very small, in-memory data sets by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this quick start guide we use very small, in-memory data sets by
```

leveraging common Python libraries like NumPy and Pandas.

> In general, once you loaded your datasets using Ray Data, you also want to apply some preprocessing steps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In general, once you load your datasets using Ray Data, you also want to apply some preprocessing steps.
```

We skip this step here for simplicity.
In any case, the result of this step is a Ray Datastream ``ds`` that we can use to run inference on.

> .. margin::

Reviewer: Recommend moving this to the intro of the advanced section.

Author: but I need to tell users now that we do it later. it's a note for the impatient

    For larger data sets, you can use Ray Data to load data from cloud storage like S3 or GCS.
    We'll cover this later on.

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: HuggingFace

>         For the HuggingFace example of this guide, we'll create a Pandas

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Create a Pandas
```

>         DataFrame with text data that we'd like to run a GPT-2 model on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        DataFrame with text data to run a GPT-2 model on.
```

        .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/hf_quick_start.py
            :language: python
            :start-after: __hf_quickstart_load_start__
            :end-before: __hf_quickstart_load_end__

    .. group-tab:: PyTorch

>         For the PyTorch example of this guide, we'll create a NumPy array with 100

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Create a NumPy array with 100
```

        entries, which represents the input to a feed-forward neural network.

        .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/pytorch_quick_start.py
            :language: python
            :start-after: __pt_quickstart_load_start__
            :end-before: __pt_quickstart_load_end__

    .. group-tab:: TensorFlow

>         For the TensorFlow example of this guide, we'll create a NumPy array with 100

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       Create a NumPy array with 100
```

        entries, which represents the input to a feed-forward neural network.

        .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/tf_quick_start.py
            :language: python
            :start-after: __tf_quickstart_load_start__
            :end-before: __tf_quickstart_load_end__

> 2. Setting up your Model

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Setting up your model
```

                :end-before: __hf_quickstart_model_end__

            .. annotations::
                <1> Use the constructor (``__init__``) to initialize your model.

                <2> The ``__call__`` method runs inference on a batch of data.

    .. group-tab:: PyTorch

        .. callout::

            .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/pytorch_quick_start.py
                :language: python
                :start-after: __pt_quickstart_model_start__
                :end-before: __pt_quickstart_model_end__

            .. annotations::
                <1> Use the constructor (``__init__``) to initialize your model.

                <2> The ``__call__`` method runs inference on a batch of data.

    .. group-tab:: TensorFlow

        .. callout::

            .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/tf_quick_start.py
                :language: python
                :start-after: __tf_quickstart_model_start__
                :end-before: __tf_quickstart_model_end__

            .. annotations::
                <1> Use the constructor (``__init__``) to initialize your model.

                <2> The ``__call__`` method runs inference on a batch of data.

> 3. Getting Predictions with Ray Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Getting predictions with Ray Data
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once you have your Ray Datastream ``ds`` and your predictor class, you can use

> ``ds.map_batches(...)`` to get predictions.

Reviewer: Suggest adding links to the API ref entry.

> Mapping batches this way is the recommended way to run inference with Ray, but there are also other options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mapping batches is the recommended way to run inference with Ray, but there are also other options.
```

Reviewer: You mention this in the callout below. New users only need to know about map_batches.

``map_batches`` takes your predictor class as an argument and allows you to specify

> ``compute`` resources by defining a so-called ``ActorPoolStrategy``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``compute`` resources by defining the ``ActorPoolStrategy``.
```

Reviewer: Suggest linking to the API ref. It was really difficult to find where this is in the API ref. I was searching for an object using docs search and didn't realize that this is a parameter to map_batches. If this is obvious to seasoned developers, then please ignore.

In the example below, we use two CPUs to run inference in parallel and then print the results.
We cover resource allocation in more detail in :ref:`the configuration section of this guide<batch_inference_config>`.

.. tabs::

    .. group-tab:: HuggingFace

        .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/hf_quick_start.py
            :language: python
            :start-after: __hf_quickstart_prediction_start__
            :end-before: __hf_quickstart_prediction_end__

    .. group-tab:: PyTorch

        .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/pytorch_quick_start.py
            :language: python
            :start-after: __pt_quickstart_prediction_start__
            :end-before: __pt_quickstart_prediction_end__

    .. group-tab:: TensorFlow

        .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/tf_quick_start.py
            :language: python
            :start-after: __tf_quickstart_prediction_start__
            :end-before: __tf_quickstart_prediction_end__

> .. note::

Reviewer: Suggest either using functions or actors, but not mentioning both, because this is a quickstart, not a comprehensive guide.

Author: very good point, moved it to the advanced section

    You can use ``map_batches`` on functions, too.
    This is mostly useful for quick transformations of your data that doesn't require
    an ML model or other stateful objects.
    To handle state, using classes like we did above is the recommended way.
    In the dropdown below you find an example of mapping data with a simple Python
    function.

    .. dropdown:: Example using ``map_batches`` with functions

        This example transforms example data using a simple Python function.

>         The ``map_function`` uses the fact that our ``data`` batches in this particular

Reviewer: Suggest adding links to the API ref entry for `map_function`.

        example are Pandas dataframes.
        Note that by using a map function instead of a class, we don't have to define

>         ``ActorPoolStrategy`` to specify compute resources.

Reviewer: Suggest adding a link to `ActorPoolStrategy`.

        .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/batch_formats.py
            :language: python
            :start-after: __simple_map_function_start__
            :end-before: __simple_map_function_end__

> .. seealso::

Reviewer: Suggest moving this to the Advanced section and not list it prominently because we don't recommend it.

Author: thanks! I moved it much further down.

    As we've discussed in this guide, using ``map_batches`` on a class defining your model
    should be your default choice for running inference with Ray.

>     However, there are other options, too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

>     For instance, if you're already using the Ray AIR framework for running your ML workflows,

Reviewer 3: I believe the plan is to standardize on `map_batches` instead of the BatchPredictor interface going forward so there is only one way to do things, so I would remove this reference here :)

Reviewer 3: cc @ericl

Author: agreed. let's leave it in for now and deprecate in the next round. this is not super urgent, I think. for now I consider this useful.

>     you might want to have a look at our

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    you may want to use the
```

    :ref:`framework-specific batch predictor implementations<air_framework_predictors>`.

>     If you want to see an extension of our quickstart example using an AIR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    To see an extension of the quickstart example using an AIR
```

Reviewer: `Quickstart` (no space) is what the Google Developer Style Guide recommends, but since the rest of our docs use `quick start`, let's be consistent.

    ``HuggingFacePredictor``, see the following example:

    .. dropdown:: Batch inference example with HuggingFace and Ray AIR

        .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/hf_quick_start.py
            :language: python
            :start-after: __hf_quickstart_air_start__
            :end-before: __hf_quickstart_air_end__

.. _batch_inference_advanced_pytorch_example:

> Advanced Batch Inference Guide

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Advanced batch inference guide
```

------------------------------

> Having run a first example, let's have a look at a more complex setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> We use batch inference on a pretrained PyTorch model for image classification

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Let's use batch inference on a pre-trained PyTorch model for image classification
```

as a running example to illustrate advanced concepts of batch processing with Ray.

.. important::

    If you want to dive right into example use cases next, consider reading the following
    tutorials next:

    .. panels::
        :container: container pb-3
        :column: col-md-3 px-1 py-1
        :img-top-cls: p-2 w-75 d-block mx-auto fixed-height-img

        ---
        :img-top: /images/ray_logo.png

        .. link-button:: /data/examples/ocr_example
            :type: ref
            :text: Batch OCR processing using Ray Data
            :classes: btn-link btn-block stretched-link

        ---
        :img-top: /images/ray_logo.png

        .. link-button:: /data/examples/torch_detection
            :type: ref
            :text: Fine-tuning an Object Detection Model and using it for Batch Inference
            :classes: btn-link btn-block stretched-link

        ---
        :img-top: /images/ray_logo.png

        .. link-button:: /data/examples/torch_image_example
            :type: ref
            :text: Training an Image Classifier and using it for Batch Inference
            :classes: btn-link btn-block stretched-link

> Loading your data with Ray Data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Loading data with Ray Data
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> In the quickstart guide we glossed over the details of loading data with Ray Data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the quick start guide we glossed over the details of loading data with Ray Data.
```

Your data might be stored in a variety of formats, and you might want to load it from different sources.

> Ray data is designed to be flexible and supports much of what you need out of the box.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ray Data supports multiple formats and sources out of the box.
```

        <4> Finally, we return the ``"class"`` key of the model predictions as Numpy array.

Scalable inference with Ray Data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To get predictions, we call :meth:`ds.map_batches() <ray.data.Dataset.map_batches>`,
by making sure to specify a `ActorPoolStrategy <ray.data.compute.ActorPoolStrategy>`
which defines how many workers to use for inference.

.. callout::

    .. literalinclude:: ./doc_code/torch_image_batch_trained.py
        :language: python
        :start-after: __pt_prediction_start__
        :end-before: __pt_prediction_end__

    .. annotations::
        <1> In this example we use a total of four Ray Actors to run inference on our dataset.

        <2> Each actor should use one GPU.

To summarize, mapping a UDF over batches is the simplest transform for Ray Datastreams.
The UDF defines the logic for transforming individual batches of data of the dataset
Performing operations over batches of data is more performant than single element
operations as it can leverage the underlying vectorization capabilities of Pandas or NumPy.

.. _batch_inference_formats:

> Working with batch formats

Reviewer 3: This got a lot simpler with the new `strict` mode that will be the default for Ray 2.5, we should rework this to take the changes into consideration.

@ericl can point you to the relevant changes :)

Author: @pcmoritz yep! I'm aware, but still wanted to have a proper "ray 2.4 checkpoint" first as a reference, as agreed with @zhe-thoughts. Will definitely overhaul this next week, once this initial version is up.
